v0.12.0 changelog (#1859)
PennyLaneAI/catalyst: doc/releases/changelog-0.12.0.md

<h3>New features since last release</h3>

> * A new compilation pass called :func:`~.passes.ppm_compilation` has been added to Catalyst to

Author: > At least we might want to consider mentioning that these are non-executable programs and are meant to explore compilation.

This is a good option!

> * A new compilation pass called :func:`~.passes.ppm_compilation` has been added to Catalyst to

Author: See change

>   transform Clifford+T gates into Pauli Product Measurements (PPMs) using just one transform.

Author: ```suggestion
  transform Clifford+T gates into Pauli Product Measurements (PPMs) using just one transform, allowing for 
  exploring representations of programs in a new paradigm in logical quantum compilation.
```

@dime10 how's that?

Reviewer: That's good! Should we also mention the program compiled this way are non-executable?

      return qml.probs()

  results = circuit()
  snapshots, *results = circuit()
  
  >>> print(snapshots)
  [Array([1.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j], dtype=complex128), 
  Array([0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j], dtype=complex128)]
  >>> print(results)
  Array([0.25, 0.25, 0.25, 0.25], dtype=float64)
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> print(results)
  ([Array([1.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j, 0.+0.j], dtype=complex128), 
  Array([0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j, 0.5+0.j], dtype=complex128)], 
  Array([0.25, 0.25, 0.25, 0.25], dtype=float64))
  ```

* Catalyst now supports automatic qubit management, meaning that the number of wires does not need 

>   to be speficied during device initialization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to be specified during device initialization.
```

  [0. 1. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.]
  ```

* Two new peephole-optimization compilation passes called :func:`~.passes.disentangle_cnot` and 
  :func:`~.passes.disentangle_swap` have been added. Each compilation pass replaces `SWAP` or `CNOT`

>   instructions at the MLIR level with other equivalent elementary gates.

Author: Fair point!

```suggestion
  instructions with other equivalent elementary gates.
```

  [(#1823)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1823)

  As an example, :func:`~.passes.disentangle_cnot` applied to the circuit below will replace the 
  `CNOT` gate with an `X` gate.

  ```python
  dev = qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=2)

  @qml.qjit(keep_intermediate=True)
  @catalyst.passes.disentangle_cnot
  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit():
      # first qubit in |1>
      qml.X(0)
      # second qubit in |0>
      # current state : |10>
      qml.CNOT([0,1]) # state after CNOT : |11>
      return qml.state()
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> from catalyst.debug import get_compilation_stage
  >>> print(get_compilation_stage(circuit, stage="QuantumCompilationPass"))
  ...
  %out_qubits = quantum.custom "PauliX"() %1 : !quantum.bit
  %2 = quantum.extract %0[ 1] : !quantum.reg -> !quantum.bit
  %out_qubits_0 = quantum.custom "PauliX"() %2 : !quantum.bit
  ...
  ```

<h3>Improvements 🛠</h3>

* The :func:`qml.measure <pennylane.measure>` operation for mid-circuit measurements can now be used 
  in qjit-compiled circuits with program capture enabled.
  [(#1766)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1766)

>   Note that using :func:`qml.measure <pennylane.measure>` in this way binds the operation to 
>   :func:`catalyst.measure`, which behaves differently than :func:`qml.measure <pennylane.measure>` 
>   in a native PennyLane circuit, as described in the *Functionality differences from PennyLane* 
>   section of the :doc:`sharp bits and debugging tips <sharp_bits>` guide. In regular qjit-compiled 
>   workflows (without program capture enabled), you must continue to use :func:`catalyst.measure`.

Author: ```suggestion
  Note that using :func:`qml.measure <pennylane.measure>` with Catalyst in this way binds the operation to 
  :func:`catalyst.measure`, which may lead to slight differences in behaviour, as described in the *Functionality differences from PennyLane* 
  section of the :doc:`sharp bits and debugging tips <sharp_bits>` guide.
```

@dime10 how's this?

>   workflows (without program capture enabled), you must continue to use :func:`catalyst.measure`.

Reviewer: May I suggest the following:
```
  Note that the simulation behaviour of mid-circuit measurements can differ between PennyLane and
  Catalyst, depending on the chosen `mcm_method` QNode parameter. Please see the
  :doc:`sharp bits<sharp_bits#functionality-differences-from-pennylane>` for additional information.
```
(link should also go straight to the section, not 100% sure how to achieve this)

>   Note that using :func:`qml.measure <pennylane.measure>` in this way binds the operation to 
>   :func:`catalyst.measure`, which behaves differently than :func:`qml.measure <pennylane.measure>` 
>   in a native PennyLane circuit, as described in the *Functionality differences from PennyLane* 
>   section of the :doc:`sharp bits and debugging tips <sharp_bits>` guide. In regular qjit-compiled 
>   workflows (without program capture enabled), you must continue to use :func:`catalyst.measure`.

Author: ```suggestion
  Note that the simulation behaviour of mid-circuit measurements can differ between PennyLane and
  Catalyst, depending on the chosen `mcm_method`. Please see the 
  *Functionality differences from PennyLane* section in the
  :doc:`sharp bits and debugging tips page <sharp_bits>` for additional information.
```

  `qml.T` gate.
  [(#1738)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1738)

* The `keep_intermediate` argument in the `qjit` decorator now accepts a new value that allows for
  saving intermediate files after each pass. The updated possible options for this argument are:
  - `False` or `0` or `None` : No intermediate files are kept.
  - `True` or `1` or `"pipeline"`: Intermediate files are saved after each pipeline.
  - `2` or `"pass"`: Intermediate files are saved after each pass.

  The default value is `False`.
  [(#1791)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1791)

* The `static_argnums` keyword argument in the `qjit` decorator is now compatible with PennyLane 
  program capture enabled (:func:`qml.capture.enable <pennylane.capture.enable>`).
  [(#1810)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1810)

* Catalyst is compatible with the new :func:`qml.set_shots <pennylane.set_shots>` transform 
  introduced in PennyLane v0.42.
  [(#1784)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1784)

* `null.qubit` can now support an optional `track_resources` keyword argument, which allows it to record 
  which gates are executed. 

>   [(#1619)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1619)

Author: Just adding a comment here so that it's not hidden due to it being outdated (https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1859#discussion_r2200843519)

> @isaacdevlugt @dime10 I would recommend including this as an internal change rather than an improvement.
> Reason being a) that it is subject to change and b) that it's not the way we would/will generally encourage users to go about resource tracking - we have planned work in Q3 to improve specs and resource tracking generally which should make it more accessible and performant.
> Since there is already interest in the feature (as you said @dime10), I think it wouldn't hurt to include an example, although I wouldn't say it's strictly necessary.

Reviewer 3: @dime10 would you have a moment to write up a minimal code example that highlights this functionality in the way you find most useful? If so, we could add it to these release notes.

  `qml.T` gate.
  [(#1738)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1738)

* The `keep_intermediate` argument in the `qjit` decorator now accepts a new value that allows for
  saving intermediate files after each pass. The updated possible options for this argument are:
  - `False` or `0` or `"none"` or `None` : No intermediate files are kept.
  - `True` or `1` or `"pipeline"`: Intermediate files are saved after each pipeline.
  - `2` or `"pass"`: Intermediate files are saved after each pass.

  The default value is `False`.
  [(#1791)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1791)

* The `static_argnums` keyword argument in the `qjit` decorator is now compatible with PennyLane 
  program capture enabled (:func:`qml.capture.enable <pennylane.capture.enable>`).
  [(#1810)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1810)

* Catalyst is compatible with the new :func:`qml.set_shots <pennylane.set_shots>` transform 
  introduced in PennyLane v0.42.
  [(#1784)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1784)

* `null.qubit` can now support an optional `track_resources` argument, which allows it to record 

>   which gates are executed.

Reviewer: Should this not contain an example? I know many users are interested in this, so it might even be good to push the visibility of this further.

Author: Wait... kinda confused why this change is logged in Catalyst 🤔 @jzaia18 @AntonNI8 do either of you have context for that?

Author: Also, if null qubit support was added to Catalyst this release, which PR / changelog entry recorded the change? 🤔

Reviewer: I know it's "experimental", but it's also something that is incredibly useful and external collaborators have asked for. I'll leave it up you then to decide how to highlight this.

Reviewer 3: @isaacdevlugt @dime10 I would recommend including this as an internal change rather than an improvement.
Reason being a) that it is subject to change and b) that it's not the way we would/will generally encourage users to go about resource tracking - we have planned work in Q3 to improve `specs` and resource tracking generally which should make it more accessible and performant.
Since there is already interest in the feature (as you said @dime10), I think it wouldn't hurt to include an example, although I wouldn't say it's strictly necessary.

  [(#1619)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1619)

<h3>Breaking changes 💔</h3>

> * The `QuantumDevice` interface in the Catalyst Runtime plugin system has been modified, which 

Author: 🫡

  Finally, the `PrintState` and the `One`/`Zero` utility functions have been removed, since they
  did not serve a convincing purpose.

> * Some Catalyst primitives for JAX have been renamed, and the qubit deallocation primitive has been 
>   split into deallocation and a separate device release primitive.

Author: ```suggestion
* (Frontend Developers Only) Some Catalyst primitives for JAX have been renamed, and the qubit deallocation primitive has been 
  split into deallocation and a separate device release primitive.
```

  - LAPACK kernels are updated to adhere to the new JAX lowering rules for external functions.
  [(#1685)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1685)

  - The trace stack is removed and replaced with a tracing context manager.
  [(#1662)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1662)

  - A new `debug_info` argument is added to `Jaxpr`, the `make_jaxpr` functions, and 
  `jax.extend.linear_util.wrap_init`.
  [(#1670)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1670)
  [(#1671)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1671)
  [(#1681)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1681)

* The version of LLVM, mlir-hlo, and Enzyme used by Catalyst has been updated to track those in JAX 
  v0.6.0.
  [(#1752)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1752)

  The LLVM version has been updated to 
  [commit a8513158](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/179d30f8c3fddd3c85056fd2b8e877a4a8513158).
  The mlir-hlo version has been updated to 
  [commit e30c22d1](https://github.com/tensorflow/mlir-hlo/tree/617a9361d186199480c080c9e8c474a5e30c22d1).
  The Enzyme version has been updated to 
  [v0.0.180](https://github.com/EnzymeAD/Enzyme/releases/tag/v0.0.180).

> * The clang-format and clang-tidy versions used by Catalyst have been updated to v20.

Reviewer: This is not a breaking change, at best this could be classified as an internal change (but we can probably omit it entirely).

  `itertools.product(range(2), repeat=2)`.
  [(#1665)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1665)

* Catalyst now correctly supports `qml.StatePrep()` and `qml.BasisState()` operations in the
  experimental PennyLane program capture pipeline.
  [(#1631)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1631)

* `make all` now correctly compiles the standalone plugin with the same compiler used to compile 
  LLVM and MLIR.
  [(#1768)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1768)

* Stacked Python decorators for built-in Catalyst passes are now applied in the correct order.
  [(#1798)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1798)

* MLIR plugins can now be specified via lists and tuples, not just sets.
  [(#1812)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1812)

* Fixed the conversion of PLxPR to JAXPR with quantum primitives when using control flow.
  [(#1809)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1809)

* Fixed a bug that occurred when a qjit'd workflow contained Pythonic control flow and Autograph was 
  turned off, leading to compilation passes being applied incorrectly and giving incorrect end 
  results.

>   [(#1840)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1840)

Reviewer: Hmm the PR is called "Fixes up chained self inverses", and the example in there contains no control flow 🤔

>   [(#1840)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1840)

Reviewer: It's possible the original issue mischaracterized the problem. The current description talks about control flow and autograph, which I don't think are relevant to issue. It is also a bit vague, as it never says what the problem was.

Erick described the change as "Fixes canonicalization of insertion and extraction into quantum registers.". Maybe the following is more accurate and informative:

```
* Fixed a bug in the internal simplification of qubit chains in the compiler, which manifested
  after certain transformations like `cancel_inverses ` and lead to incorrect results.
```

>   [(#1840)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1840)

Author: Thanks! 🙌

  The Enzyme version has been updated to 
  [v0.0.180](https://github.com/EnzymeAD/Enzyme/releases/tag/v0.0.180).

* The clang-format and clang-tidy versions used by Catalyst have been updated to v20.
  [(#1721)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1721)

* Support for Mac x86 has been removed. This includes Macs running on Intel processors.
  [(#1716)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1716)

  This is because 
  [JAX has also dropped support for it since 0.5.0](https://github.com/jax-ml/jax/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md#jax-050-jan-17-2025),
  with the rationale being that such machines are becoming increasingly scarce.

  If support for Mac x86 platforms is still desired, please install Catalyst v0.11.0, PennyLane 
  v0.41.0, PennyLane-Lightning v0.41.0, and JAX v0.4.28.

* The Sphinx version has been updated to v8.1.
  [(#1734)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1734)

* The device kwarg parsing in the Catalyst runtime has been updated to disallow nested dictionary 
  formats.
  [(#1843)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1843)
  [(#1846)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1846)

<h3>Deprecations 👋</h3>

> 🦗... 🦗... 

Author: Should we mention Python 3.10 support being deprecated? 🤔

Author: Yep!

* Fixed AutoGraph fallback for valid iteration targets with constant data but no length, for example
  `itertools.product(range(2), repeat=2)`.
  [(#1665)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1665)

* Catalyst now correctly supports `qml.StatePrep()` and `qml.BasisState()` operations in the
  experimental PennyLane program capture pipeline.
  [(#1631)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1631)

* `make all` now correctly compiles the standalone plugin with the same compiler used to compile 
  LLVM and MLIR.
  [(#1768)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1768)

* Stacked Python decorators for built-in Catalyst passes are now applied in the correct order.
  [(#1798)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1798)

* MLIR plugins can now be specified via lists and tuples, not just sets.
  [(#1812)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1812)

* Fixed the conversion of PLxPR to JAXPR with quantum primitives when using control flow.
  [(#1809)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1809)

* Fixed a bug in the internal simplification of qubit chains in the compiler, which manifested in 

>   certain transformations like `cancel_inverses ` and lead to incorrect results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  certain transformations like `cancel_inverses ` and led to incorrect results.
```

  [(#1683)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1683)

* The assembly format for some MLIR operations now includes `adjoint`.
  [(#1695)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1695)

* Improved the definition of `YieldOp` in the quantum dialect by removing `AnyTypeOf`.
  [(#1696)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1696)

* The assembly format of `MeasureOp` in the `Quantum` dialect and `MeasureInBasisOp` in the `MBQC` 
  dialect now contains the `postselect` attribute.
  [(#1732)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1732)

* The bufferization of custom Catalyst dialects has been migrated to the new one-shot bufferization 
  interface in MLIR. The new MLIR bufferization interface is required by JAX v0.4.29 or higher.
  [(#1027)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1027)
  [(#1686)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1686)
  [(#1708)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1708)
  [(#1740)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1740)
  [(#1751)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1751)
  [(#1769)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1769)

> * The package name of the Catalyst distribution has been updated to be consistent with

Reviewer: Hmm I don't think this is internal. It is very public in the sense that official package name has changed. However, it shouldn't affect users in most common interactions.
